Sorry, but just tell me your name again.
I'm John Christensen.
I'm the director of admissions at St.
John's College.
And this is a position you've known for how long?
20 years.
So, yeah, it's been a long time.
Pretty interesting time.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
It has been.
Unlike a lot of people, if you like the college and like what it does, you come, and if things work right, you're likely to stay and not want them.
That's what's happened to me.
And where are you from, John?
I'm actually born late in California.
I'm one of those natives out there.
I always thought I would go back, but never made it.
Where did you go to school?
I went to the University of California as an undergraduate.
I graduated from Santa Barbara and went to Berkeley for a while.
I went to graduate school at Northwestern and got a degree and a Ph.D.
in English literature.
briefly at Hofstra University and the University of Rhode Island before coming here.
I got out of graduate school in the days where there were no jobs for people with degrees in their early 70s.
I guess the market is much better now.
Marginally better, I think.
Yeah.
Did you expect to get into administration and admissions?
No, but when I was at the University of Rhode Island, realizing that I
I had been doing a sabbatical replacement job, and I was tired of that, but I knew I wanted to stay in higher education.
So I was looking for things to do.
I did some administrative work, very little, but I saw them in their adult education program.
A friend of mine knew I was looking for things outside of a traditional department, and she happened to be on the reading list
the mailing list for this college just because she was interested in the reading that's done here and the kinds of things that she can take up and so she'd written for information asked to be placed on the reading list and she got a job announcement and she knew that this would be an interesting place and that i might like it so i looked into it i wrote a letter i came and i got the job and i've been here ever since
Did the Great Books concept appeal and attract you?
Yes, very much.
I was very interested in the Great Books idea, but particularly in the interdisciplinary dimension of it.
One of the things I always felt in my own education was a lack of comprehension and familiarity with much about math and science.
did just find those subjects in high school that had long since really forgotten anything and was, like most people, at least like many people, unhappy with the kind of rope approach to math and science that you get in high school.
When I went to graduate school, I became interested in the 19th century, British fiction in particular, and the great social changes from the late Victorian period, in particular in the 20th century.
One of the things that I ended up writing about
was the impact of science and technology on literary theory and practice.
I'd always felt like I would have done a much better job in graduate school if I'd actually had some grounding in something other than humanities.
This program appealed to me very much on account of its broad-based nature and
the fact that everything was an original text that we read here.
Like everyone else, at some point in college, Western Civ courses that were required, you hear about Galileo, you hear about Copernicus, you hear about Descartes, but very few people actually ever read them.
So the notion of undergraduates here
really sitting down and coming to grips with those books.
At the same time, they're reading great works of literature.
Really fascinating.
As a director of admissions, what are you looking for in that book?
Here, it's very interesting because to some degree, if you compare the profile of many of our students with those at selective institutions around the country, we would look like we have
a lot of very strong students and that we are a selective institution.
We are different from those colleges that we compete with in the sense that we are not looking to drum up huge numbers of applicants only to reject everything but what we see as the cream of the crop.
Instead, we are really looking for reasons to take people.
While our application process resembles that at other
What we have at the core of ours is a set of application essays.
We're really reading those to see, does the student understand what we do and how it differs from what they would be doing at a more conventionally structured institution?
Do they have some reason for believing that this is the approach to education that they want to take and that it has something to do with the way in which they learn that?
We are looking for people who want to do this, and if they want to do it, make a plausible case that they understand what it is and that they really do want to do it, what we're then checking to see is do they have the fundamental skills, but our assumption is not that we're going to take only those students with the highest test scores and highest GPA.
We don't actually require any standardized tests.
The college took that stand many, many years ago, and we don't require them.
It turns out that probably 90% of the students either submit them or we find them in their secondary school report.
Yeah, they're quite competitive.
Combined, let's see, the combined average
This last fall's class is probably 1380, 1390.
It's close to 1400.
It's very competitive.
But as I say, we look at those kinds of things as, we don't try to make some distinction between people who have 1380 as opposed to 1360 or something like that.
It's really, do the scores when we have them and the record, have whatever it is, show that they have the kind of minimum competency in subjects in which we have long sequences, math,
science and foreign languages in particular.
So if they can do the work, and then their essay shows that they really do want to do it and have some real understanding of it, then we're going to take them.
One of the interesting things about the college, I think, is that it's really, at heart, very fundamentally democratic.
The founders of the program did not think that this was elitist.
They thought that the books that we read should be
in some sense part of any educated citizen's knowledge.
People in a democracy should have some considerable acquaintance with those works that have shaped the modern world in all of its branches, from math and science to literature and philosophy.
So the assumption here really is that there's going to be a range of students.
It's not going to be just the most
But let me say, having spent, you know, almost four hours, and this is just a visual, non-scientific examination, but I think I've seen maybe one non-white person.
Yeah, minority representation is about 11%, which is not as high as we would like it, but it's pretty much on the par with a lot of the places that we would overlap with, small liberal arts colleges.
Are you looking for diversity?
Yeah, I was just talking about my daughter who is a kid in high school.
We really are trying to get diversity here.
She said, this is the whitest state in America.
And, you know, everybody tends to reflect that.
And so they try to make my head even affirmative.
You know what I'm saying?
Trying to balance the student body.
Do you find that what you offer here does appeal to the minority students?
Just as it appeals to only very few majority students, it appeals to only very few minority students.
We've done things that were targeted to minority populations, and they were just flopped.
We've done a special mailing through the student search service they have.
Now, one could say maybe we didn't send the right messages or whatever, but we try to tell them what we tell everybody else, what we do, and those kinds of efforts failed.
What has simply happened here, I think, is that the college has begun to reflect the changing American world.
In other words, if you walk around on campus, it's true you won't see very many minorities, but you'll see more Hispanic students, more Indian students.
of Indian extraction from India, you'll see a handful of African-American students, maybe 2-3% in a given year.
That's very different than it was 20 years ago.
When I came 20 years ago, there was one black student the whole time I was here.
We've changed a little bit, but I think it's just because it's not through any particular effort we've undertaken, except
generally to get our name out.
And as our name has gotten out to more and more people, friends tend to bring friends.
Contacts tend to have contacts.
And so the few first adventuresome sort of minority students who got here have subsequently brought friends.
I don't think this program... Well, to say something else about it, I think that minority students
Those of us in college admissions are often worried about approaching minority students as though they're minority students, because they can sometimes resent it, in the sense that they want to be treated just like anybody else.
I can think of a minority student here, a woman who transferred from Penn, who turned down a national science award for African Americans on the grounds that she would not take anything just because she was a minority student.
But this is all by the way of saying that those minority students who are interested in what we do here, I think are interested, obviously, for the same reasons majority students are.
We can't go to somebody and say, look, if you come to St.
John's, there's a terrific Afro-American studies program, or we don't have a, you couldn't say to a minority student, well, you'll find there's a lot of minority students and a big student African-American
We just don't have any of that.
If you want to come here, you're going to pretty much just fall into the main industry.
I do think that the college is a good place in that sense, that people are, I think, pretty much tolerant, pretty much inclusive.
The college doesn't seem to divide up into little factions.
There are some, but not very many.
I think the presumptuous of me to speak for
minority students who were here but those that i know have talked about who i think just kind of feel like you're just coming you're part of the mainstream and that's the end of it and i asked some of those kids that i had lunch yesterday and a lot of criticism that you that you see with this cultural debate and really this is why i'm here when i was right about this in a way i mean the more i look at this cultural debate
the less interesting I find it everywhere.
Because I'm not going to resolve anything.
It's an itch to them.
I thought, well, let's just go where are the books.
Here are the books, and this is what they're doing.
But I also said to these kids, do you feel like you're out of touch with the rest of the world?
Some of you said, yeah.
And one young woman said she hadn't even read the newspapers, possibly.
and that books are preparing her for more intensive reading.
But I guess the question is what you hear.
A lot of people feel that books, literature, should be relevant.
I asked this question to Helen Bendler.
How do you respond to people who say, I don't read Shakespeare because Shakespeare is not relevant.
And she said, what is relevant?
She said, a work of art is relevant, period.
That's its own relevance.
I don't know if that's a question, but do you have any thoughts on that?
On that debate, on the question of relevance and, I guess, the eternal nature of the great folks?
Well, I guess there's not going to be anything new or particularly insightful, but it's interesting, I think, with respect to the multicultural business.
One of the things I always try to talk with counselors and others who come in groups, and somebody always asks the question, well, you don't have very much that represents blacks, or you don't have very much that represents women.
And the point I try to make to them is, no, we don't, because that's not what we're about here.
All of the books that we read claim something universal about human experience.
And that's what I think is at the heart and very important.
At the heart of what we do, it's very important to understand that we always
to read and talk about things that are common to us all as human beings, whether we're white, black, men, or women, whatever.
To some extent, the emphasis on multiculturalism may be driving people into their own factions and separating us more than we really understand.
This program, what we do here, is to some extent corrected in a way.
It speaks to us in some universal way.
It makes claims about how we experience space and time, not because you're black or white, but because Kant says that's the nature of man's time.
I think students, my sense of it is that when reading student applications is that the kids are not unaware of these kinds of issues
They're alert, bright kids in a high school world where all kinds of stuff is going on, and they're aware of the multicultural issues.
Many of them come from high schools and communities that are quite diverse.
Yet there's something timeless about these books, something that strikes them, and they're willing to step out of that world and come.
These works, the way we approach them, strikes a real chord.
Maybe it is that there's something there that they sense as permanent or always important in the midst of all the shifts they're going through, that they're looking for something that's a persistent kind of human question.
After all, we read books that talk about truth or bravery or what it means to be virtuous.
I mean, those are all things that
young people struggle with uh so something about what we do i think strikes at that kind of idealistic part of young people searching for something that's really the best and thinking that somehow the books and the way with which we're going to talk about the books here is a repository of that sort of knowledge or reason i asked many young people i had lunch with today
any of these 120 or so books that were impenetrable for you.
Yes, there are books.
Harvey is tough without the support system and the discussions.
Copernicus, of course, is tough.
I'm wondering, because I haven't been to a math class, and math was devastating for me.
How do you teach math by reading books?
and whomever it is that you read.
I'm not the best person to talk about that.
You say that math and science are very fundamental here as part of the four years, and it goes through four years.
Is that right?
But we also go beyond the reading of the books, right?
We deal with problems and finding solutions.
Well, yeah, that's right.
I guess one thing, the faculty might wince about this.
Maybe not quite true, but to some extent, you know, the math and science sequences are more theoretical than they are applied.
I mean, we're trying to get people to think about what is the mathematical object?
I mean, what can be described by mathematics?
Can there be good things mathematically, and bad things, or beautiful and ugly things?
So what is the nature of mathematics?
What does it tell us about the world in which we live?
The same kind of thing is thought about in science, that how do hypothesis and experiment and conclusions work?
What is it that we know when we've demonstrated something?
So I think for a lot of students who, even students who have excelled in math and science in high school, as well as for those who've struggled through them,
The approach that we have is a little bit different, and for the first time here, math and science sometimes become not only enjoyable, but comprehensible to some degree.
You sort of understand how it progressed penetrably.
Yes, penetrably.
How it progressed in Western civilization, at least in some broad, general way, you can understand distinctions between ancient mathematics and modern mathematics, and the kinds of claims that might be made about
something in the past and our skepticism about them now and that maybe tells us the example people always give is that when we read Ptolemy in the first two years we know that Ptolemy's wrong but after you read Ptolemy and you have someone give a beautiful and convincing explanation of the organization of the heavens in which all is apparently accounted for but you know it's wrong you're a lot more skeptical about
accepting other sorts of things, other sorts of plausible explanations.
So I think that it's that kind of thing that we try to get at in math and science.
We do do problem solving, but it doesn't take the form of
here's a form I'd go home, solve these problems.
It takes the form of coming to class and working on problems together in the classroom.
So it's not that kind of isolated drilling sort of experience.
It's thinking and asking questions about things.
We don't have examinations, per se.
No written examinations.
Do students have to write papers, do they?
Yeah, there are four or five short papers for math and language and lab over the course of a year.
And then every year each student writes what we call the annual essay.
That's turned in on the second semester to seminar tutors.
And it's an essay on anything that
It's an essay on anything that's been of interest to them that year and approved by their two seminars.
It's meant to be a lengthy and important
essay, in the real sense of that word, not a research paper, they're really supposed to come to grips with something else.
How long is it supposed to be?
I think they're probably typically 20 pages or more.
The one that's turned in in the senior year, which is turned into the faculty as a whole and is called a senior essay and all that, those can often run to
Are they focused?
Again, to varying degrees.
Are they footnoted?
Do they follow MLA style guidelines?
The quality?
I don't know that we insist on any particular style like the MLA style sheet or something.
They may be footnoted for reasons, but again, they would distinctly not be a research paper.
I guess the criterion by which we often judge the papers for the purposes of accepting them or not is, is this paper something that you could stand a public oral examination on for about an hour
and have a profitable experience in which we'd all learn.
In other words, you might get a paper written that structurally is not that good, it's weak writing, but nonetheless raises issues that are important to the student that are insightful and worth talking about.
The range of what's written in terms of its quality is quite broad, as is
whether or not it's a particularly focused essay or far-ranging.
But it's to get the students to really think on their own about something that's very important to them and try to write a real essay.
But you say it's not research, so you're really not required to go into the library.
Not required to, probably not quite forbidden, but it's really supposed to be you thinking through some issue that you've defined
You do have reference to sources?
On a book or a series of books maybe that we've read here at the college, sometimes people will choose something that we haven't read.
In which case, you try to find somebody who's willing to deal with it.
Some years ago, we had a student who wanted to write about the fairy queen, and I was unfortunately one of the few people who'd read the fairy queen.
I didn't know anybody.
And got drafted into being willing to read the script.
So I don't remember all about his paper.
It was on mutability cancers in particular.
Yeah, he brought in many other works that we've read about the question of change and the question of death and regeneration and so forth, and tried to understand the fairy queen from those points of view.
Look at it.
But it's not just a paper that's submitted.
You discussed it, and then they introduced... In the senior year,
The senior essay is submitted to the faculty as a whole.
But they approve of the subject.
That's right.
You will have had an advisor who will have tried to get you to focus this and clarify it, and that advisor may well have seen early drafts of the paper and tried to help you refine your ideas or put them into shape.
And then when the paper is done, it's turned into the faculty as a whole, then there's a committee that reads it.
And when that committee reads it, amongst the members, which will be three, they decide whether or not this is an acceptable paper.
And then if it is an acceptable paper, then a public oral exam is scheduled for it.
And that committee will examine the students.
Every student is examined.
Every graduating senior has to have
And paper accepted and stand a successful oral defense on it.
And how long did it take?
About an hour.
Really?
How long is it for faculty?
Probably about 65 or 70.
And this is a big burden in this time.
I'm afraid we've got a hundred seniors.
You're on a lot of committee.
What if it's not an acceptable paper?
If it was not an acceptable paper, there's a period in which it can be rewritten and resubmitted.
That would be not uncommon.
You go back to your advisor and you get some advice and you try to whip it into shape and get it accepted.
It's possible, and it has happened that people have just choked and haven't been able to do it, which means you don't graduate.
You've got to then submit a paper.
Now, I mean, in some cases, people have postponed doing that and getting their degree for a year or two or three or four years.
Usually, though, of course, the faculty does everything within their power to get the person through and get them to graduate.
It's less likely, but it has
Thank you so much.
I appreciate it.
One could write a successful paper and then fail the oral examination, but that would really be unusual, and that's all likely that it would be someone who just panicked the public and it would reschedule.
And this is rare?
That would be very rare.
What's the attrition rate?
Let's do a bit of class.
We graduate about 70 to 72 percent of the students that we enrolled.
That's not in four years.
The Department of Education uses a six-year standard, and that's what most colleges and universities should be reporting when they're reporting the standard.
In four years, we probably graduate between 55 and 60 percent, something like that.
Who do you discourage from applying here?
I've got my daughter with me.
Yeah.
Do you do this?
By the way, do you discourage parents from coming in with this?
No, we like to have parents come along.
We're happy to talk to them.
College is unusual enough.
There are a lot of issues and questions, so we're happy to address them.
One kind of student that we would discourage would be someone who has a weak background in one of the subjects I mentioned, math or science or
languages where we have long sequences where you really have to have a certain level of confidence.
If you're just weak in, say, math, the chances of you getting through junior and senior lab are not high.
You don't want to be a junior and senior and fail a part of the program because it's all required and you can't go on.
You're just stuck.
The other kind of person that we would discourage would be someone who's
application essays really showed an unlikely that they would be capable of writing successful essays in each of the four years.
In other words, the writing is either structurally weak, really weak, or they just don't have anything to say.
Superficial.
I shouldn't say that we discourage anybody, but there are often misperceptions about the program, and the most common is that we only do literature and philosophy here.
Most people tend to associate the college with what we call seminar, which is that part where we read philosophy, literature, history, stuff that would be in humanities departments elsewhere, and students forget that half of the program are readings in
mathematics and natural sciences.
So you don't want us to come in with that kind of misconception about how half of this time is going to be spent in the four years here.
There is also one other sort of person that we try to discourage or certainly reject when we really detect it, and that's the kind of person who already knows that they know everything.
and who's not willing to listen to other people.
I've had students come for interviews and ask questions like this.
Well, what if I went to a seminar and they asked the opening question and I knew the answer?
Wouldn't that be the end of it?
Well, you know, I don't think you understand things.
I mean, the kind of question that we're going to ask you isn't going to be something that you're the only person that has the answer to.
But there are people who have that attitude that I'm pretty sharp, I know a lot of stuff, and I would be the one who would win the arguments in class or be the one that had the right answer.
It's kind of intolerance and lack of imagination that there can be give and take or that people could disagree over in serious matters and have an important discussion about.
What for you is your most revealing question?
I'm 17 years old.
I'm down from knowing what they're looking at.
I'm not asking if you don't continue on the end, but I guess I'm interested to know what you want to know about me.
I must say that in the interviews, the kinds of questions I ask are not ones where they might be sort of hauling to other places to try to get them to reveal themselves.
They're ready for that.
Yeah, they're ready for that.
Usually what I ask them about is, well, you had obviously read about the college and were interested in it enough to come for a visit.
Now, is it what you thought it was, or is it appreciably different from what you imagined it would be?
The reason I ask that question of everybody I interview is we really try to get them to see as clearly as we can what it is we do and whether or not it's right for them.
In other words, we do want the admissions process to remain what we say it is now, largely self-selective, so that we really want the student to know
Gee, I came thinking that these were all warm and fuzzy discussions.
We could sit around and say cool things, but really they're actually very rigorous, and they really push you to refine your ideas.
Is that what I want?
Do I want my ideas scrutinized, even attacked politely, by others in class?
So I try to find out from them
is the disparity between what they imagined, what myths they might have had about St.
John's, and what they actually find out here.
Because sometimes they discover other myths.
Maybe they sit on a seminar where everybody seemed brilliant, and what they don't know is, well, if you'd come on some other night, it might have been a book that stumped them all, or certainly not everybody in the college is brilliant.
You could come here and be successful.
things like that.
In terms of discouraging someone or really pressing them to think about it, that is the other trouble spot.
It even happens with students who make the decision to come here.
They think that they want to discuss, but the burden of doing it every day
is too much and they either become quiet or they were not able to overcome their shyness.
And so we often in faculty meetings talk about the problem of the silent student.
How do you find ways to draw them out?
We often talk as faculty when we teach
about a student in the class and think of some strategy to pull that student out of his or her silence, because it's really here the exchange of ideas that is important.
It's not just reading the books.
The books are the occasion for you to talk to other people about important things.
That's really, again, at the heart of what we think we're doing here.
And so you can't just be somebody who says, well, I'm going to read the books and go to class and listen and collect the wisdom.
There's no way to know how the student's doing.
Absolutely right.
For the faculty, it's a real burden, and with the student who remains silent, and the student that we can't find ways to draw out, they will often schedule
a special conference and talk to a student about that conference.
That was a question that I had.
Do you teach, by the way?
Yeah, infrequently, but from time to time.
So what classes do you teach?
When I teach, I almost all, well, I've always taught seminar because it meets in the evening and I still have my day job.
So I'm only free at night.
Tell me about this whole concept, the evening seminars.
Yeah, seminar was determined to be what's right for the first time.
The two-hour framework for the evening seminar is twice a week.
I think everybody, right?
Always meets Monday and Thursday from 8 to 10.
As I understand this, at least, part of the reason for meeting in the evening was that, in a sense, the day's busy work is over, and if the discussion needs to go longer than two hours, you don't have to stop at the bell and get up and go to the next class.
And you will find that seminars do often drift over half an hour or something like that.
So that's part of it.
It's practical.
At the end of the day, there's space to go on.
But I think it's also the case that there's something about having had dinner and coming and arriving for this evening discussion.
in a formal way twice a week and with the leisure to talk to people.
And the faculty, you call them the faculty, by the way?
I'm calling them the faculty because everybody else gets confused.
We call them tutors.
All faculty here have the same rank and title, namely tutor.
And it's borrowed from the British tradition.
And it's not just a semantic difference from professor.
It really is intended to convey the notion that
faculty's business here is not to profess knowledge in a particular field of expertise it is instead the function of a tutor that is to say to facilitate the students learning learning that he or she is largely responsible but you must have tutors that specialize in the science end that's right everybody who comes back
Most people who come to the college will be faculty who have training in traditional graduate departments and academic fields.
But the interesting thing is, like the students, they have to teach across the curriculum, too.
You cannot simply teach in your field of expertise.
So if someone who, like me, if I had come to the college as a regular faculty person with a background in English literature, I might be
more comfortable, let's say, in a seminar and maybe in a language tutorial, but I'm still going to have to teach freshman math and software math eventually.
Will you get up to it?
Well, you have to get up to it.
You have to study yourself.
Yes.
A lot of that's accomplished through faculty study groups in which people with different kinds of expertise pass their expertise on to other faculty.
preparation for classes that they will be running here.
Many younger faculty will spend a good deal of their time maybe sitting in on other classes.
You might, for example, be someone who's planning to teach Greek in a year or so, so you might want to audit some Greek classes if you don't know any Greek.
And the students learn Greek?
I mean, how do we do that?
Yeah, actually for Greek we use a manual written by faculty here at the college.
But we don't expect students in a foreign language tutorial to either become aware of the mastery of Greek and French.
We do expect them all to get up to the ability to translate with a dictionary.
So in the opening portions of freshman year, you just spend a lot of time doing the kind of memory work
And I noticed today that memorization is important here.
I was in a class where a young woman did a wonderful job to put this, J. Alfred Cuford.
I was moved by it.
I told her actually that that was really lovely.
I said, I'm glad I was going to hear that.
Yeah, that's actually a very interesting point.
Much of what we do in the language tutorial is close attention to language, even if that means reading, doing a translation, say, from French to English poetry, or vice versa, simply to get people to really pay attention.
So one of the exercises you can do, one of those old-fashioned things people always did, was memorize lines of poetry.
Force yourself to really
I didn't hear that one.
I read George Steiner's big criticism of education too.
Nobody read anything anymore.
That's right.
Yeah, they're no more favorite poems.
No more favorite poems.
We all had to do it.
And, you know, when I was in college, I went to Bates up in Maine.
And my two semester Shakespeare course, I mean, there were certain sonnets that we were required.
And to just stay there with me, you know, and I'm enriched by them.
Anything I haven't covered that's important to you?
What would you like me to leave here with today?
No, I think you can ask me about the things that I think really are important in the college.
I wanted to give you, because I see you don't have it, a full-blown catalog.
We call it a catalog, but it's really a statement of programming, so it's a narrative description of, say, the seminar and how it works out over four years, and a long narrative description of what we try to accomplish in the lab program.
Let me get through that, and if you think of something while I'm pulling up the shelf... If you've got kids who are... to who sports mean a lot of...
Big intramural sports program.
Intramural sports are a real mainstay of college life here.
You have a pool and all that good stuff.
We don't have a pool, but there's a swimming group that uses a really nice Annapolis pool.
There are a couple of things here in the extracurricular life that are really important to students.
The intramural sports program, we have an extensive extracurricular arts program.
There are lots of people that are interested in art.
We don't formally teach the visual arts.
We've got studio arts.
We've got an art gallery.
There are often lectures and things about art.
There's also one of the persistent interests, as you might guess, of drama.
There are a lot of kids who've been in theater in high school who want to continue here.
So the drama group here is always very innovative.
There's also a political forum, which is kind of characteristic of what students do here.
Well, we know how to study any contemporary political theory, and so the political forum is a group that students put together to talk about contemporary political issues.
But it happens to be a club that has a kind of formality that others don't.
But what's really common here amongst students and faculty is extracurricular study groups.
Students here are just as likely to form a group to study Hebrew as they are to
form a group to read contemporary women writers and just have another class and just meet.
One of the amazing things about this place is that, and I think this is great, education is seen as being fun.
It's not a torture to do this work and to learn and to think about ideas and to share them with one another.
It's seen as something desirable, something exciting, something that you can actually enjoy.
Students here would not want to miss a class.
That would just be very sad if you missed a class.
What if a student does miss a class?
We have attendances required at the college, and if a student misses a certain number of classes, they're throwing out of college.
We don't tell them what that number is.
There's a threshold, and when you cross it... But we don't have unlimited cuts, in other words.
Actions don't have any cuts.
That's right.
It's required, and there's a... Attendance is required.
Yeah, and there's a small number of...
you can miss and you might get talked to about it and it won't be long after that if you miss more that you're asked to leave.
You mentioned that there is no length in the faculty, but do you have tenure?
Yes, there is tenure.
How does that work?
It is entirely...it doesn't have anything to do with publications.
Though many of our faculty do publish,
and some of them are quite accomplished in their fields.
But the actual decision about tenure involves the ability to learn and work with students in this program.
It's really focused on the institution as a teaching institution.
So, for example, one of the things that will be looked at is
A new tutor will be paired every year with a more senior tutor in seminars.
So over four, five, or six years leading up to a tenure decision, there will be several faculty who know that person as a partner in class.
There will be many others who might know them from conversations in the coffee shop, but also from faculty study groups.
instruction committee that will be reaching the decision about tenure, we'll interview every senior that that faculty member has taught over his or her career here.
And they take what the students have to say seriously.
So there's a real conscientious effort to make certain that the person is able to do the work of the program across the board and that they really are working with students.
It's a pretty fixed program.
Did you add anything and take anything away from it?
You had your shot, had your opportunity?
Well, the faculty, I guess, has their opportunity all the time.
The problem is that things are set up in such a way that
change is difficult, and that's intentional so that we're not blown around by whatever trends are... 120 or so books are prefixed.
Yeah, if, for example, you were to propose that you wanted to add something to the seminar reading list, you would at the same time have to propose what to delete.
So the number, what is the number?
I don't know if there's an absolute number, or if there is, I'm not sure what it might currently be, but in other words, if you want to say, look, let's add...
Let's add Joyce's Ulysses to the senior year.
Well, what are you going to take out?
Tocqueville?
You're going to take out some of Hegel?
You're going to take out some of the American political documents of America?
You're going to take out a lot.
You're just only so much time.
Adding something to the reading list is not easy.
It requires a lot of
persuasion, and it does happen, and certain things get deleted.
The more common kind of change is the year-to-year change where people who maybe caught senior seminar, yeah, I can think of a good change.
We've been talking for some time about whether or not what we do in the sophomore year is really right.
Mainly we used to read
an awful lot, virtually all of the Old Testament and New Testament back-to-back, as though they were one continuous sequence.
After some considerable debate, we decided to not read them back-to-back, but to, there's a break that now occurs, and I forget which sequence goes between the two of them, but people thought that maybe that was a better way to
You haven't added or taken away.
Can you think of any instances where you've added something away and what has the consequences been taken away?
I can't think of a good example.
In recent years, we talked about the great books after.
In recent years, we dropped some of the Marx readings.
We shortened
and added instead some fiction to the senior year.
So that certain things we read in senior year might now come up to Faulkner maybe, or Flannery O'Connor.
Do you have any of those Flannery O'Connor that came in?
I forget exactly what it was, but essentially we added some more recent American fiction to the reading list and dropped some of the rather lengthy block we had of Mark's reading list.
Is it perceived as a canon here?
Are the great books considered a canon?
No.
In fact, I think an interesting take on this again is this.
I think that we think we're a liberal arts college, and our goal is to inculcate the skills that come from the liberating art, the ability to think and to solve problems, and that sort of thing.
And if you push people, they would say that, well, you could accomplish those things with a different set of books.
But the books we chose, because we are, for better and worse,
We live in a world that is largely dominated by the Western tradition.
It makes some sense to have a familiarity with the foundations of your own culture as a starting point for learning things about other cultures.
It's also just practical.
We've bitten off a lot, as it is, but what we've bitten off is all the different parts are related to one another.
Things build on one another.
accretion of knowledge and richness as you read through the sequence of readings over the four years that you wouldn't get if you were just randomly selecting some here, and then, oh, let's read a few books from the Eastern tradition over here, and then maybe some of this.
It's meant to build on one another and have a kind of coherence.
But no, I think people would say right away, in fact, people would say right away, we do not read the great books.
What we claim is that all the books we read are in fact great by certain kinds of standards and are worth reading, but we adequately deny that our list is the great books.
We readily acknowledge there are many great works we don't read.
That's important.
Yeah, I think that that is important.
Again, that's why I talk to counselors and others.
It's something I try to get people to see that we're not claiming that this list is definitive in some way.
It suits our purposes.
It suits our purposes, and we would defend our choices if these books are well worth reading.
But they're not going to exclusive to the point of view.
I think we're going to wrap up pretty soon.
Is there a poster that you have?
Yeah, somebody did that.
That's beautiful.
We'll take a picture of that.
Would you say that this is not for everyone?
Yeah, it's not for everyone.
You have to be somebody who's interested.
You have to be committed to, as I said earlier, talking with other people in class about issues that are important.
That means you have to be willing not only to say what you think,
but to have a challenge by other people to be able to refine your positions and to be tolerant of people who disagree with you.
In other words, the group effort isn't to arrive... In seminar, for example, the group effort isn't really to arrive at an answer to the opening question, but to articulate as clearly as we can for ourselves some of the possible answers or approaches to that question.
So you've got to be satisfied
you've got to be willing to do the talking and participate in exchange you've also got to be the kind of person who's satisfied uh to stay in limbo because when the seminar is over the the two tutors aren't going to say well those of you who thought x actually have the right answer and the rest of you are wrong now we know what the answer is we get all those things you're going to remain in limbo it's up for you it's up to you to decide the theological texts that we read i think they're interesting to say
We ask people to take seriously reading something like the Old Testament or the New Testament and to really talk about it and face the claims that are made.
But at the end of the day, it's up to you to decide what you believe.
And then just one final factual question.
How large is the student body?
We're a little over 430 students on this campus right now.
fairly evenly divided among classes?
At present, I want to say that we have something like 100 seniors.
I don't know what a freshman class of, a total freshman class of, maybe 100 years.
And how many apply in a given year?
In a given year, we'll have about between 350 and 400 students apply for what is a freshman class of about 108 to 120.
And how many do you admit?
We'll usually admit 70% or more of those 80% in a given year.
Our yield off, that will be quite high.
About 60% will eventually enroll in college on one of its two campuses and one of the two freshman classes.
So it's 430 here.
Yeah, about 400 in San Francisco, a little bit smaller.
So it's about 800 students.
Yeah, it's really a college of 800 students, half of them in one other place.
Evenly divided between men and women or approximately?
I'd say, my guess would be about 300.
that the overall student body reflects the freshman class, which is typically 60% male.
That won't tax your voice anymore.